Post: ServiceComposer contract-less composition request handlers (#334)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/contract-less-handlers.md

    [BindFromBody<BodyModel>]
    [BindFromRoute<int>(routeValueKey: "id")]
    public Task Handle(HttpRequest request)
    {
        return Task.CompletedTask;
    }
}
```

The new style doesn't require an interface or applying those _BindFrom*_ attributes. Not to mention that all binding operations are automatically executed, and their results are presented to the code as method arguments.

## The "feeling-at-home" principle

Why all this fuzz, one could argue? In my [last article](https://milestone.topics.it/2025/01/08/all-new-goodies-in-servicecomposer.html), I introduced the "feeling-at-home" principle. ServiceComposer always aimed to be a first-class citizen in the ASP.NET ecosystem, but the required composition syntax was departing too much from the one of controllers and actions.

In the end, if you think about it, ServiceComposer handles incoming HTTP requests, like any controller, with the only difference being that there could be more than one composition handler for a given request—ASP.NET complains if more than one controller action is configured to handle the same route.

## There is more

The "feeling-at-home" principle also led to a couple more functionalities.

> Similarly to ASP.NET, ServiceComposer now supports [endpoint filters](https://github.com/ServiceComposer/ServiceComposer.AspNetCore/blob/master/docs/endpoint-filters.md), using the same semantics, types, and syntax as ASP.NET. Last but not least, [composition request filters](https://github.com/ServiceComposer/ServiceComposer.AspNetCore/blob/master/docs/composition-filters.md) are a long-standing feature that provides a similar experience to ASP.NET action filters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to ASP.NET, ServiceComposer now supports [endpoint filters](https://github.com/ServiceComposer/ServiceComposer.AspNetCore/blob/master/docs/endpoint-filters.md), using the same semantics, types, and syntax as ASP.NET. Last but not least, [composition request filters](https://github.com/ServiceComposer/ServiceComposer.AspNetCore/blob/master/docs/composition-filters.md) are a long-standing feature that provides a similar experience to ASP.NET action filters.
```

#pragma warning disable SC0001
namespace Snippets.Contractless.CompositionHandlers.Generated
{
    [EditorBrowsable(EditorBrowsableState.Never)]
    class SampleCompositionHandler_SampleMethod_int_id_string_aValue_Snippets_Contractless_CompositionHandlers_ComplexType_ct(Snippets.Contractless.CompositionHandlers.SampleCompositionHandler userHandler)
         : ICompositionRequestsHandler
    {
        [HttpGetAttribute("/sample/{id}")]
        [BindFromRoute<Int32>("id")]
        [BindFromQuery<String>("c")]
        [BindFromBody<ComplexType>()]
        public Task Handle(HttpRequest request)
        {
            var ctx = HttpRequestExtensions.GetCompositionContext(request);
            var arguments = ctx.GetArguments(this);
            var p0_id = ModelBindingArgumentExtensions.Argument<Int32>(arguments, "id", BindingSource.Path);
            var p1_c = ModelBindingArgumentExtensions.Argument<String>(arguments, "c", BindingSource.Query);
            var p2_ct = ModelBindingArgumentExtensions.Argument<ComplexType>(arguments, "ct", BindingSource.Body);

            return userHandler.SampleMethod(p0_id, p1_c, p2_ct);
        }
    }
}
#pragma warning restore SC0001
```

> The generated and user one classes are registered in the _Inversion of Control_ container, enabling dependency injection in the user contract-less composition requests handler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generated and user classes are registered in the _Inversion of Control_ container, enabling dependency injection in the user contract-less composition requests handler.
```

In a recent release of the `Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.Analyzers` package, the .NET team deprecated source generators in favor of incremental source generators. The migration is far from straightforward; it's indeed a PITA. I want to evaluate whether it's worth migrating before the final release or releasing it as is and doing the migration in a subsequent minor.

Last but not least, there are some pending design decisions. For example, the interface approach gives immediate access to the HTTP request, context, and surrounding properties. The contract-less approach makes it more difficult, requiring users to opt-in to the HTTP context accessor, register it in the IoC container, and add a dependency.

It’s not the end of the world, but are there better options? Sure thing. For example, ServiceComposer contract-less request handlers could support the `[FromServices]` to make the design even more in line with ASP or support a convention-based approach. If the handler has a non-private HttpContex property, the source generator will emit code to set it.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

It's critical to mention that `4.2.0.-alpha.1` includes other changes. That means it's safe to update, as all existing functionalities are unchanged, and using the new syntax to define contract-less composition request handlers is opt-in.

```

In a recent release of the `Microsoft.CodeAnalysis.Analyzers` package, the .NET team deprecated source generators in favor of incremental source generators. The migration is far from straightforward; it's indeed a PITA. I want to evaluate whether it's worth migrating before the final release or releasing it as is and doing the migration in a subsequent minor.

Last but not least, there are some pending design decisions. For example, the interface approach gives immediate access to the HTTP request, context, and surrounding properties. The contract-less approach makes it more difficult, requiring users to opt-in to the HTTP context accessor, register it in the IoC container, and add a dependency.

It’s not the end of the world, but are there better options? Sure thing. For example, ServiceComposer contract-less request handlers could support the `[FromServices]` to make the design even more in line with ASP or support a convention-based approach. If the handler has a non-private HttpContex property, the source generator will emit code to set it.

> It's critical to mention that `4.2.0.-alpha.1` includes other changes. That means it's safe to update, as all existing functionalities are unchanged, and using the new syntax to define contract-less composition request handlers is opt-in.

Author: ```suggestion
It's critical to mention that `4.2.0.-alpha.1` includes no other changes. That means it's safe to update, as all existing functionalities remain unchanged. Using the new syntax to define contract-less composition request handlers is opt-in.
```
